# Sentiment Analysis 2020 Election Tweets
## **Research Question:** *Quantifying public engagement toward political parties on twitter to predict election results*
##### Social media platforms including Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter have altered how we share and communicate news and opinions regarding current affairs entirely. Twitter plays an integral part in the mainstream media and has allowed it to become a platform for electoral campaigning and the political discourse as a whole. Influential and powerful individuals and organizations including politicians, political parties, and news agencies have increased the use of Twitter to change public sentiment regarding current and public affairs. During the 2020 US presidential election campaign, millions of tweets were posted by users around the world. Fortunately, we have access to detailed information regarding these tweets by every individual to an extent where we can predict groundbreaking outcomes of the future. 
##### The data used in this particular research consist of the two primary election candidates, Donald Trump, and Joe Biden. We have separate data sets of tweets that contain their respective names. The tweet data was accessed from Kaggle which has been collected since October 2020 for approximately one month (24 days to be exact) till the election month of November 2020. There are many tools to measure the popularity of someone on platforms like Twitter. For instance, the number of tweets for each candidate could demonstrate their number of supporters. Similarly, the public engagement on these tweets like the number of retweets would indicate how well-known a particular tweet is and how often the message in that tweet is supported by others on the platform. Similarly, the number of likes on a particular tweet is another important variable to measure the popularity of a tweet and whether people favor a particular agenda or not. Moreover, the location origin of a tweet is of utmost importance since that would indicate whether the tweet count of a specific state within the US eventually dictates a relation between the real vote counts of the mentioned state and its ultimate result.
##### Unfortunately, the nature of tweets is ambiguous since it represents emotions and so, we must identify and categorize them. To analyze whether these opinions are in support or against the candidates, in this case, Biden or Trump, sentiment analysis is a tool typically chosen to approach such a problem. The goal of sentiment analysis is to understand the opinions of people. It analyzes emotions, opinions, and attitudes towards issues and uses natural language processing and machine learning techniques to automatically identify subjective information from text data and then categorize it into positive, negative, or neutral sentiments. 
##### Sentiment Analysis has been previously applied on tweets from the US 2012 Presidential Election (Mohammad, 2014) as well as the 2016 Presidential Election (Joyce, 2018). Moreover, not only in the US but sentiment analysis has also been conducted on tweets on the political tweets of UK (He, 2012), Spain (Rodriguez-ibanez, 2021) and India (Ansari, 2019). The goal of sentiment analysis is to understand the opinions of people. It analyzes emotions, opinions, and attitudes towards issues and uses natural language processing and machine learning techniques to automatically identify subjective information from text data and then categorize it into positive, negative, or neutral sentiments (Coletto, 2015). Deep learning has been implemented in sentiment analysis of political tweets as well (Pota, 2018). This paper takes a relevantly new approach to analyzing tweets in terms of time intervals, machine learning techniques including logistic regression models and regression trees to predict certain aspects of the tweets. A time-series analysis of tweets that contains different sentiments for the respective candidates, Trump and Biden, was also conducted. It indicated of how simple moving average models for different time windows of the sentiment scores can be related with real world events and how controversial incidents can impact electoral campaigns.
##### After working rigorously with the data sets, we observed how the likes, retweet counts, and user follower counts of tweets were positively related to the vote counts of most states in the United States via the number of tweets throughout the USA. It is very important to realize that we hypothesized that tweets with positive sentiments or emotions would have a positive correlation with vote counts in general.
##### When viewing the plots for each candidate, we observed how a weaker association in our regression meant a higher public engagement on the social media platform. We saw that Biden for all our independent variables had a much higher public engagement. This can be because our data set contains a much larger number of tweets that relates to Biden compared to Trump. This resulted in outliers in the Biden data set which unfortunately made our results less clear and more skewed in general. 
##### Moreover, we mapped the mean positive and negative sentiment scores for the tweets along with the voter turnout (vote-to-population ratio) by state for each candidate. It did uphold our expectations as we expected, a high positive score for a candidate would suggest that they would win in that state. Similarly, a high average negative sentiment in a state for a candidate eventually meant that we would expect a loss for them. Although this was true in the majority of cases, some outlier states were also spotted in both instances. One interesting relation we observed during the research was how COVID-19 affected the 2020 election results. In particular, Biden had better health policies and reforms compared to Trump and so, the states which were hit by COVID-19 the hardest in terms of daily cases preferred to vote for Biden. 
##### Finally, we observed through our regression results that the number of tweets for each state had a strong positive relationship with the number of votes each candidate received which confirmed our hypothesis. We assumed that the number of tweets was dependent on the engagement on the platform but unfortunately, there was a very weak relation between tweet count with variables like retweet counts and there was some other external unknown factor involved. Nevertheless, our results were statistically consistent with the election results where Biden won in most states as predicted becoming the next President of the United States of America.
